---
title: "Research"
---

My research program focuses on analysis of large ecological datasets to explicitly incorporate sources of spatial and temporal variability into understanding motivations for an organism’s movements, resource selection, subpopulation structuring, or presence in a landscape. My research often involves study designs beyond the scope of a single population or geographic area in attempts to understand ecology of research organisms at the landscape and/or national scale through multiple series of studies to address gaps in research. Within this broader framework, my primary research interests are (1) linking occurrences of disease to demographic and environmental influences on disease transmission and spread, (2) landscape genetics of various taxa to monitor population size, relatedness, and subpopulation structuring across ecosystems and barriers to gene flow, (3) methodologies for spatial analysis of mammalian and avian datasets to determine ecological drivers of movements, resource selection, and presence/absence; and (4) methods to use stable isotopes to understand movements, nutritional ecology, and effects of anthropogenic disturbance on various
species at the landscape scale.

**Spatial Epidemiology** — My research spans a variety of disease organisms, host species, and
ecosystems to provide managers with methods to monitor and manage wildlife species for various
diseases. Starting with sampling and diagnostics, my research provides management agencies with
methodology to sample Elaeophora spp. in moose, bacterial and viral diseases in muskrat, rabies in raccoon, chronic wasting disease (CWD) in various tissues in numerous cervid species, and bovine tuberculosis, Mycobacterium bovis (bTB) transmission between white-tailed deer and cattle and other wildlife reservoirs. I then developed methods to incorporate this diagnostic work into landscape-scale approaches to inform management for the affected species. For example, I linked habitat use and movements of Virginia opossum diagnosed with bTB to cattle farms that previously tested positive for bTB in Michigan and I linked demographic/environmental covariates to occurrence of CWD in mule deer throughout Colorado. These innovative Bayesian Hierarchical models have since been used by my research program to assist state/federal agencies to understand presence and distribution of CWD in Nebraska, Maryland/Pennsylvania/Virginia, and have been repeated by the general research community throughout North America.

**Landscape Genetics** — Various aspects of genetics of an organism aid in informing space use and potential for disease transmission or presence/absence in a landscape. For example, cervid species in the Mid-Atlantic region have substantially different patterns of the prion protein gene (PrP) relative to western populations that makes them more or less susceptible to CWD. This information was largely unknown for related cervid species in Eurasia, Scandinavia, and unaffected areas in North America. My current research assesses PrP heterogeneity across landscapes in the Mid-Atlantic, Minnesota, New York, and Ohio proving invaluable to understanding susceptibility of cervid populations to CWD. My research program also was the first to assess a
microsatellite panel to use across the eastern U.S., genetic assignment testing to identify origin
(captive versus wild) in the Mid-Atlantic region, and landscape genetics at the regional scale
to understand potential gene flow as an index to disease spread throughout a landscape. This research identified potential gene flow between an emergent foci of CWD in Pennsylvania and the core of the epidemic in West Virginia/Virginia that started detecting CWD over a decade before it was detected in Pennsylvania. My research designs for PrP and microsatellite panels have since been replicated across numerous cervid species throughout North America where CWD is present to inform managers which populations might be more connected based on estimates of gene flow to inform managers of the locations of the most vulnerable to disease.

**Spatial Ecology** — In addition to methodologies in the 2 previous sections, my research program focuses on methodologies to provide a landscape-level approach to monitoring wildlife populations. Global positioning system (GPS) technology allows for remote data capture from a steadily increasing number of taxa, species, and individual animals with a crucial limitation being that basic research still lacks tools to process these data to achieve the full potential of these datasets. My research has developed multi-stage steps to process, store, and analyze data for researchers to follow worldwide that describes new methodologies for analysis of movements, home range, and resource selection. I have developed and published on methodologies that have been used by researchers and management agencies to document white-tailed deer use of: biofuels, contrasting landscapes, riparian zones, and urban landscapes. My methodologies also have been used by my lab, researchers, and management agencies for a variety of mammals including Florida panther, mule deer, Rocky Mountain elk, mesocarnivores, feral swine, and black bear. I have also adapted these methodologies to avian species including American white pelican, black and turkey vulture, along with creating an innovative three-dimensional flight path using GPS locations to mitigate collisions with vulture and military aircraft.

**Stable Isotope Ecology** — My expertise in spatial data analysis has also extended to the use of stable isotope analysis to understand movements, nutritional ecology, and effects of anthropogenic disturbance on various species at the landscape level. I have identified questions that were complex in nature and developed novel uses of stable isotopes of carbon and nitrogen (‰C/‰N) in ecology of various species that are currently used by researchers. I have an invited manuscript and was Special Issue Editor summarizing this research. My research on ‰C/‰N has spanned diverse species, ecosystems, and resource management topics and has identified: diet choice before and after development of a wind-power facility, differences in tissues of varying metabolic activity in elk, nutritional response of sympatric deer species to fire in a prairie landscape,
and subpopulation differences of ungulates occupying a fenced preserve compared to private lands. I mentored a graduate student in use of ‰C/‰N to understand ecological effects of guano input from colonies of nesting red-footed boobies on Mona Island, Puerto Rico to determine ecological impacts of guano on plant productivity on the island.